walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/libraries-walkthrough.md, before:

# Libraries

## Getting Started

Over the past 2 weeks, you've learned about client-side HTML and JavaScript, and
server-side Java.

This week, you're going to learn about libraries that provide access to various
features of Google Cloud.

You can return to this walkthrough anytime by running this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/libraries-walkthrough.md
```

Click the **Start** button to begin!

## Choose a Library

Choose one of the following libraries to add to your portfolio:

### Authentication

Authentication lets users login to your webapp.

Start the authentication walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/authentication/authentication-walkthrough.md
```

### Blobstore

Blobstore lets users upload files like images.

Start the Blobstore walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/blobstore/blobstore-walkthrough.md
```

### Image Analysis

Image analysis allows you to detect the contents of an image.

Start the image analysis walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/image-analysis/image-analysis-walkthrough.md
```

**Note:** This library requires Blobstore, so if you're interested in image
analysis, make sure to finish the Blobstore project first!

### Maps

Google Maps allows you to embed an interactive map in your webpage.

Start the maps walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/maps/maps-walkthrough.md
```

### Sentiment Analysis

Sentiment analysis allows you to extract information from text.

Start the sentiment analysis walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/sentiment-analysis/sentiment-analysis-walkthrough.md
```

### Translation

Translation allows you to convert text from one language to another.

Start the translation walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/translation/translation-walkthrough.md
```

## Congratulations

<walkthrough-conclusion-trophy></walkthrough-conclusion-trophy>

Congratulations! Your portfolio should now contain a feature that uses a
library! Make sure your
[MVP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimum_viable_product) works and is
submitted to your GitHub repo by the end of the week.

To start the next set of projects, run the test-driven development intro
walkthrough:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-4-tdd/intro/tdd-intro-walkthrough.md
```

Commit message:

Add link to charts walkthrough.

walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/libraries-walkthrough.md, after:

# Libraries

## Getting Started

Over the past 2 weeks, you've learned about client-side HTML and JavaScript, and
server-side Java.

This week, you're going to learn about libraries that provide access to various
features of Google Cloud.

You can return to this walkthrough anytime by running this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/libraries-walkthrough.md
```

Click the **Start** button to begin!

## Choose a Library

Choose one of the following libraries to add to your portfolio:

### Authentication

Authentication lets users login to your webapp.

Start the authentication walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/authentication/authentication-walkthrough.md
```

### Blobstore

Blobstore lets users upload files like images.

Start the Blobstore walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/blobstore/blobstore-walkthrough.md
```

### Image Analysis

Image analysis allows you to detect the contents of an image.

Start the image analysis walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/image-analysis/image-analysis-walkthrough.md
```

**Note:** This library requires Blobstore, so if you're interested in image
analysis, make sure to finish the Blobstore project first!

### Charts

Google Charts allows you to embed an interactive chart in your webpage.

Start the charts walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/charts/charts-walkthrough.md
```

### Maps

Google Maps allows you to embed an interactive map in your webpage.

Start the maps walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/maps/maps-walkthrough.md
```

### Sentiment Analysis

Sentiment analysis allows you to extract information from text.

Start the sentiment analysis walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/sentiment-analysis/sentiment-analysis-walkthrough.md
```

### Translation

Translation allows you to convert text from one language to another.

Start the translation walkthrough by executing this command:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-3-libraries/translation/translation-walkthrough.md
```

## Congratulations

<walkthrough-conclusion-trophy></walkthrough-conclusion-trophy>

Congratulations! Your portfolio should now contain a feature that uses a
library! Make sure your
[MVP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimum_viable_product) works and is
submitted to your GitHub repo by the end of the week.

To start the next set of projects, run the test-driven development intro
walkthrough:

```bash
teachme ~/software-product-sprint/walkthroughs/week-4-tdd/intro/tdd-intro-walkthrough.md
```
